So, I went to Ernie Reinke, who was then the head of the Department of Plant Breeding and Agronomy and Plant Breeding at Minnesota, who incidentally, he and I started the freshman year together at Minnesota, and I've known him all down through the years, and I said, look, I'd like to go and see Dr. Hayes, but he's in this situation mentally.
He probably won't even recognize me.
Would you be willing to go with me?
And he said, sure.
So we went over and we walked in.
He still looked fine, but he was all befuddled.
And Ernie says, you remember Norm Borlaug?
And he said, yes.
And you could see that he just kind of startled.
He said, why didn't we know that wheat was photoperiod sensitive?
And I said, because the experiment stations in the state of Minnesota, at Waseca, St.
Paul, and Crookston, were too close to the same latitude.
And he was gone.
It must have been bugging him for, and why that connection was made for those few seconds, it seems incredible to me.
Okay.
Aw.
And that's probably the answer.
That shirt was there but it made contact for a few seconds and his eyes got brilliant and like he used to just stare at you.
That's probably the answer though, isn't it?
I imagine.
I have no other answer.
It's curious how these things look.
And then he just seeped back into his metal frame.
Yeah.
And then a year later, these things were going on and it was moving in the Bahio where these things fit also.
Okay, now we're back in 48.
Yeah, 48.
We harvested those plots and I took them through on this truck, like I was saying, with all the difficulties.
And Rupert went back with the pickup the other way because he didn't have any, he wasn't carrying anything.
And we planted them that summer.
We blew them up.
multiplied them, in other words.
Did you plan on these farmers' plots now?
Were they eager to have more planning on their... Oh, yes.
They were ready by then.
Everybody wanted them.
Yeah.
And then there was a lot of black market salesmanship going on.
Part of the seed went to the government agency, of course, which started at a regular price, but part... We had to find out whether they had any acceptance.
There's only one way to do it.
There wasn't any seed organization at that time.
There wasn't any extension service.
We were everything.
And so that's the way it went.
The next year, of course, these seeds were distributed to farmers.
And then they started to try to form a seed organization, which was pretty anemic and never worked too well.
The next farmer's field day, there was a lot of more enthusiasm and more farmers.
and a year later, and by then we said, all right, and the young engineer or agronomist who was with me, had been with me for several years then, I had him explain the whole breeding program like I had done in my broken Spanish before, but I said, today we're going to show you something else.
We're going to show you the response of fertilizer to these soils.
We have now, this is the third plantings, there you can see the plots, the ones with
fertilizer, and without, with both nitrogen and phosphorus, and with nitrogen alone, nitrogen, phosphorus, and potash.
The only response is to nitrogen on these soils at the present time.
And you can see how big it is.
And I said last year it was on the order of 60%.
60%?
60% crop improvement?
Over the good variety.
On top of the good variety.
Just because nitrogen fertilizer was used?
And so I explained it.
And how did that change versus different elevations?
Well, that's with different soil types.
Oh, okay.
In the Bahio, in the central of Mexico, it would have been greater, which I haven't gone into.
But at Overgon, we're talking.
So as I explained this, I was standing up on the bed of the pickup, and the first three people standing in front of me was Rodolfo Caiz, and Eduardo Vargas, and the third farmer who was probably the best of the bunch, whose name right now escapes me, but I'll tell you in a minute.
Anyway, I explained it, and I said, are there any questions?
Jorge Parada was the third one.
And there was a deathly silence.
And finally, Jorge Parada said, and I think he probably was an even better farmer than Calice.
He said, no, Dr. Borlaug, and he spoke good English.
When he was speaking to me in English, he wanted to make sure that I understood it.
He said, I don't want you to misunderstand.
We greatly appreciate what's been done on the new varieties.
They're wonderful.
They're going to make us a lot of money, and we're going to produce a lot more food.
But there's something wrong here, and it's not your fault.
We know that you haven't had machinery.
You couldn't prepare good seed beds.
Everything has been out of your control.
But this is the best soil in the world.
you won't get that kind of a response on my farm.
This is because this is badly farmed.
It's not your fault.
Don't misunderstand.
These are factors beyond your control.
And I said, what did he mean it was badly farmed?
There was no machinery and so it had been abandoned many years and not farmed properly and the seed beds were probably poorly prepared by the way he did it.
The irrigation was probably inadequate compared to his standards.
And so, according to him, I was confusing other factors that were beyond my control because of not having decent equipment and management at the experimental station where this was being conducted.
And I said, well, Don Horky, next year I'm going to have a young agronomist who's going to put on, if we can get a pickup, about tests like this on
10 or 11 farms, that's all we'll be able to manage.
And I want one of those tests to be on your farm, if you'll permit me, and one on Don Rodolfo's.
And so we got verbal agreement, and then that changed.
Not immediately, there were also, with Jorge Parada, the same guy that was raising the questions.
The next year,
First, we had good results everywhere where we put experiments that we controlled, experimental plots.
But he took this new seed and he had about a five-cornered piece, completely irregular, close to the house where he wanted to keep it and make sure nobody, I guess, ran away with his seed.
And so what he did was put on what he thought was half fertilizer and the other half unfertilized.
And I went to see it before I left for Mexico.
And you could see it was much better than the rest, than the unfertilized.
And yet I got a note from him, said that the results were the same, no yield difference.
And I knew that there was something wrong.
And he wrote me a letter
and I told him there was something wrong, and he said, all right, we'll repeat it again next year.
And so, he put it on again.
I went to see it, and he hadn't harvested when I left for Mexico City.
In hell, it was double.
And I said, Jorge, there's something wrong.
I don't know what you're doing.
Is somebody stealing your seed and selling it, or what's going on?
About six weeks later, he came in with a sheepish
look on his face to my office in Mexico City and he said, I want to apologize for two things.
One, I just told my foreman to draw a line right across the middle of that in different angles.
He says, it turns out when I went out and measured it personally, that the part that was unfertilized was essentially twice as big as the other because of these irregularities.
And he said, now to show
So they were putting on half the fertilizer of what they needed.
Well, he meant to leave half unfertilized for comparison.
But, yes.
But on the other plot, there were really only minor treatment when they needed a full treatment.
Right.
And then he said,
I'm embarrassed to tell you this because it shows that I didn't control this situation very well, but I've just accepted the job or the distributorship for Shell and Hydro's Ammonia.
So he became the fertilizer for this non-believer.
Then we were home free very soon, except other things happened.
The next wall when I came up, this was
Well, I got ahead once more.
So he became the fertilizer distributor.
For shell ammonia, anhydrous ammonia.
In that area.
Yeah, I should have said.
He must have become a very wealthy man.
Yes, he's passed down to greener pastures also.
But I should have mentioned one other thing.
That fall, when we went up to a range where we were going to put those plots, on the farms with the
Mercado, Raul Mercado, who became a very successful farmer.
He only stayed with me two years on this fertilizer testing.
And then he wanted to go into farming.
He was a very capable individual.
I'm sorry to see him go.
He even, he says, I got to get started.
He says, I really believe that I want to be a farmer.
And as a matter of fact, I think I loaned him the first $400 as a friend.
and he became a millionaire, but that's another story, on darn good farming, one of the best, the new generation.
But when we were looking around where to put those plots, suddenly Roberto Mauri said, you know, that field day last year when you explained this fertilizer, right after that,
There's a guy turned up at the farmers' co-op, and by then he was president of the farmers' co-op, Roberto Mauri, the brother of this Aggie, whom I had helped, and he was getting to be a pretty respectable farmer, and as a result, he was elected president of this co-op.
And he said, this person came in, and he said, we're going to set up a laboratory here.
We're going to sell good crop, fertilizer.
It was a Denver, Colorado outfit.
And he said, we're going to perform soil analysis free.
And they hired some girls here and they set up a laboratory.
But they already sold Rodolfo Caius a whole carload full of fertilizer and two other farmers.
And I said, Roberto, what is that fertilizer?
He said, I don't know, but I'll go in the warehouse there, and I'll give you the label.
And they brought out a label, and it was 2020.
The only response we got was nitrogen.
It was 2%.
And I thought, God almighty, that's all we need now, and this will set us back another 10 years.
Rodolfo is buying that fertilizer.
He won't get any response from it.
So I told Roberto that I want to talk to this entrepreneur, fertilizer salesman.
And it was set up that I would see him next morning at nine o'clock.
This was before planting of this.
And I went over there and walked into this little office laboratory setup that they have.
And the secretary said, I'm sorry,
Mr. So-and-so had to leave on the midnight train last night for Mexico.
He obviously knew that they were selling the wrong kind of fertilizer for that area, but he was making a fast buck.
So then I went to Rodolfo, and I figured Rodolfo would tell the rest of them.
I said, you know, you bought the wrong kind of fertilizer.
I said, there's nothing wrong with the fertilizer, but the fertilizer doesn't fit the soil, that problem that we've got here.
The only part of that formula that will pay you anything is the 2%.
And you're paying for all of the rest of it.
He says, I haven't paid for it.
I said, for God's sakes, turn back to it.
Don't pay for it.
Well, he insisted he was going to keep part of it, but he turned most of it back, and the other people did too.
Otherwise, we'd have been set back another ten years.
Oh, sure.
They would have had no confidence in you folks at all.
And so did you get the right type of fertilizer?
Yes.
Wouldn't you need ten percent hydrogen?
No, we just wanted pure ammonium sulfate.
That's all we could get at that time, which is about twenty percent, eighteen and a half, twenty percent nitrogen, and that's all of the rest is inert.
later it got to be urea and then anhydrous ammonia a year later when this parada after he'd seen the results and remeasured then he got to be the distributor for anhydrous ammonia and that's a large part of it's either urea or anhydrous ammonia of course today some of those soils now begin to respond to phosphorus also so that
You've got a different pattern depending on crop rotations in the area because of the change in extraction of nutrients.
But you see, you've got to go through all of these jungles, barbed wire fences.
And this was my first experience in Mexico that I had to go through and many other countries as you try to go through change from an old technology, the old ways and the old methods to a new.
But you learn from those pitfalls you've been through.
A lot of it's just the confidence of the people that you're working with.
Of course.
And that's why in most foreign technical assistance programs today, this still doesn't come through.
They think that there's some magic that a person can go from a university into one of those third world countries and say, do this, do that, do the other.
And it won't work.
First of all,
Just looking casually, you don't know whether there is a technology that you're recommending, what the increase in productivity will be if they do that.
It's not been tested.
It's a hypothesis.
And even if there have been some experiments made and you see the data, you're telling them
without them having confidence in you, having seen you operate in their country, getting to know your philosophy and how much faith to put into you, they'll think you're a fast salesman.
And I have learned that this is one of the great weaknesses of USAID Foreign Technical Assistance Program.
They have had lots of good scientists, but they're left generally
for only two or at the most three years in a given country and then they're moved on to different places because they're under the policies of the State Department.
That's the way the State Department operates.
And so this explains in a large part why it has been very difficult for USAID to have had good impact even though they've had brilliant scientists.
They have not had continuity and I have never been cursed with that
because I've worked in many countries.
I never tried to move a change until I have good confidence that the package of technology that we are promoting has the possibility of increasing the yield at least 50 percent.
Sometimes it can be 100 or 200 percent once, and if it can be done when you need shock, I prefer to show them that 200
than the 50 percent, because this shocks people to the bottom of their roots, and it generates grass root fires.
The farmers suddenly see that what can happen, what the potential is.
Sure.
And so, basically what we're saying here
or so, when you had convinced the farmers and you had come up with this new type of seed, your production, and plus the fertilizer, using the fertilizer, that the production increase about 60 percent per acre.
That it was achievable, and that it was actually reached on some farms.
Well, of course, there were a few farms at that time.
And it was like that, and sometimes more, depending if they put that fertilizer together with the other, it was 100%.
But it didn't happen all at once in different places.
Lots of things were happening all at once, and there was plenty of disorder, which is not bad, because the good results, they get to the ears of the others.
And then through our field days, every year we would tighten it up and give them insights.
And it soon got to a point where, before planting,
I would put out a little folder.
Every year we'd have them printed up in the office and ahead.
By then we had an extension, week extension service that was spun off from the people trained in research.
They were around in the major areas.
And so, starting in September or early October, a month or so, six weeks before planting,
The extension people would organize a farmers' meeting in different places, and I would stop.
Maybe in two weeks I would talk.
By then there was a little better transportation around the country, too.
This was, let's say, in 52 or so, 53.
They'd have a meeting set up, sometimes at night, sometimes during the day.
There'd be 50, there'd be 100 farmers, sometimes more.
We'd hand out the folders.
I'd tell them about the intricacies and the things to be careful about.
I did it myself the first couple of years, and then the young people were with me.
They would do it, and I'd be with them.
If there were things that kind of got poorly explained, I would put my two cents worth in.
and soon was on the radio from these meetings.
And in those two weeks' time, I would probably have contact directly, personally, with a couple of, oh, with 1,000 to 2,000 people, farmers, and plus the radio, and plus the local publicity, and these folders were left everywhere, and it started going.
Not only into Nora, but by heel, we got it going the same way.
And there, because those lands had been
Farmed longer.
They were at lower levels of fertility even than Sonora.
Some of them we had to have both nitrogen and phosphorus.
Fantastic.
The way things changed.
But we had one other thing that we had to do.
And that had to do with pricing.
First, what kind of fertilizer?
And where do you get it?
And what's the price?
What about credit for buying it?
And Rodolfo was the guy that was carrying the flame on this because he organized the first farm cooperatives.
And then the question of price of grain at harvest.
And in the case of wheat, because of the long-
Beg pardon?
Didn't it have to drop?
No, because they were importing big quantities.
Oh, that's right.
That's right.
They were importing it.
And so I would talk this over with Harar early.
This was before we had the big payoff.
I said, the first thing we've got to do, I'd go through the old parts of Mexico and hell, they'd get a pittance for their week.
Millers would say it's poor quality, it's all mixed types, and it was.
It's from the old colonial times, some of it, a mixture of 10, 15, 20 types.
And I told Herar, I said, we've got to get some changes done here on this, or these poor people can't sell their crop.
Even if they learn to produce more, it'll be a losing proposition.
So we talked it over, and I said, let's go down and see the minister.
So we did, and we'd say, look, it's a simple solution.
You're importing more than half the wheat that you're consuming.
Don't give any import permits to the mills until they have bought all of the domestically produced wheat at a fair price relating to the international price.
And he just did this.
And since he controlled the imports, we never had any struggle.
And it should make him look good too.
Sure.
Because the farmers loved him.
And then Caius, he went a step farther because of the domestic prices.
He says, and we soon, even though we didn't have the laboratory when we did it, we pulled off a real good one on the first yaki and mayo wheats.
They were excellent quality.
as good, really better than the ones that they were importing, which was the soft red wheats of Oklahoma, Texas, because it was closer by transport.
Whereas these were related to Minnesota and North Dakota wheats and Canadians.
They were hard red springs, and one of the parents was a Minnesota wheat new thatch.
And they had quality characteristics that were very much like the Minnesota parent.
And we had verified this by testing it in a few samples.
We could only send out 10 or 12 to the USDA, and they milled them and baked them to General Mills.
They did it out of courtesy.
And we knew that they were good quality.
And finally, but before they hit the market, Rodolfo, by then he was tuned in on all wavelengths.
He says, all right, we're going to get the price we should get for this.
and representing all of the organized farmers in the state of Sonora before planting.
He had it organized that for the government buying agency, they would have a meeting and they would decide what the price was going to be at harvest.
So the farmers could plan on the fertilizer and how much they were going to put into that crop.
And he used to invite me to sit in with them in those early times.
And so you were getting close to him in many ways.
Much later, in other countries, where we didn't have a Rodolfo Caius who would carry the ball, then you had to do it yourself.
But you'd been through those wars.
You knew how to do it.
And, you know, seldom do I reflect on all of these, how you used your experience in one place and you used the leadership of people to carry it on elsewhere.
And, of course, Caius, once he was convinced, he came out to me, and this was considerably later.
But he said, I'm convinced.
Now, what do we have to do to put this station, experimental station, back into operating conditions so that you can keep a good staff here and live decently?
Because it's miserable the way you've had to operate.
We talked it over, and I said, well, there are no rural schools out here.
The drinking water is horrible.
It's full of salt.
We've got to drive these dusty roads during the dry season.
There's poor transportation for a long time to come, and the government agencies, they won't have enough transport to take care of the families.
It's raining and muddy roads in the summertime.
So I said, why don't we look for a place, a piece of land close to Ciudad Obregón, where we aren't burdened with the administration of all of the family problems.
That you would be way out there.
That we would way out there.
Now, this has all changed now because it's all paved roads.
But it wasn't then.
And he listened.
So he started to look for a new area.
He said, all right.
This was in 60, let's see, by 62.
It took that long?
Before we went and bought the thing.
You mean it took from 46 basically until 62?
Before they actually bought the new land, but they helped improve the situation before that in this way.
Once he saw things were changing, he said, all right, we're going to help.
What can we do?
And I said, we can't get anything here through government channels.
We order simple notebooks and pencils and the simplest of things, little thrashing machines.
We can't get them.
He said, all right, I'm going to find a way to do this.
And so this must have been in about 56 years.
He established, not by law, but an agreement first in Sonora, in the co-ops there, in Cesar de Overegon, that every bag of wheat that they sold, every bale of cotton that they sold, they would take out at point of sale so much, a small amount, and it would go into a fund.
that they would administer under what was called a patronato para investigación agricola.
It would be like our patron saint in support of agricultural research.
They elected their own officers for two years, president of vice president and treasurer, and a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture was an ex officio representative to see that there was no hanky-panky.
They would sit with the local director.
By then, we had the beginnings of some fairly well-trained people.
By the time it came into full flower, it didn't happen overnight.
The first two years, they collected the money.
They sent it into the director general of agriculture's office.
None of it came back so that we could use it.
It just disappeared.
So Rodolfo Caius went storming down, and he said, look, he went to the director general's office, and he said, he says, I don't doubt but what this money was used for experimental purposes somewhere, probably down in Yucatan for growing hinnikin or for pineapples in Veracruz.
That's your business.
But it's my business when it's Sonora, farmer's money that's used in Yucatan or in Veracruz.
That money has to come back to Sonora for use on crops that we gave it for.
And there was wrestling around there for months, but by about 19... I could tell you the exact time for my notebooks in Mexico, but it would probably have been by about 1950...
eight or so.
It was agreed that the money would not be sent to Mexico, but this committee would be formed and by then administered locally to direct support through the local representative of the Ministry of Agriculture, who was supporting research.
And then in
I said, 65, this is 55.
By 55, when he said, all right, what about fixing up this station?
And I told him, no, look for land.
And he went out the same year, found a, he got his hat in hand, and he went to all the agribusiness, all the commercial businesses, and from the farmer's co-ops, and he got enough land, money to buy 100 hectares of irrigated land.
It was just being opened up, the new high canal from a second dam.
That has grown into... And how far was that Obregón now?
Six miles.
Oh, wonderful.
By then on a paved road.
Well, it wasn't paved then, but it's, of course, paved now.
And that station now is called the CIANO, which is the acronym for the... C-I-A-N-O.
Right.
That's the Spanish acronym for the Northwest Center for Agricultural Research.
Ciano is Centro, I is Investigacion, A is Agricola del Noroeste, of the Northwest.
It's a regional research headquarters.
There's several satellite stations now scattered around the state.
Okay, and that was established in 1962 then?
That was established, no.
It was, the land must have been bought in 1950,
And we planted on it the first time in 56.
And it has grown into, and it was originally under our administrative direction, the foundation.
Our program finished in 60.
Then this became the responsibility administratively of ENIA, the National Institute of Agricultural Research.
the young people who had been trained in the Rockefeller program.
Do you follow?
And today, we continue to work there, even up until today.
It's under their administrative direction now, but it's where we have our joint.
The material is theirs, it's ours, it's everybody's.
And let me just say this.
It, since 1960, has probably had greater influence on wheat research and production than any other research center in the world.
Thousands, probably something on the order of 1,200 young wheat scientists have spent six months
there at least, and many hundreds of senior wheat scientists from around the world, including the US, Canada, Australia, Western European countries.
All came out of this little struggle.
And Don Rodolfo, once he was convinced, was the guiding hand on all of this.
And not only the guiding hand, I mean, he was out there.
He knew how to operate with political leaders in all levels.
Well, we've got a lot of things to talk about that, but I don't want to talk about that right now.
I want to go back.
The first thing I want to do is a question that I wanted to ask that deals with the first few years that you were at Obergon, and that is you're dealing not just with agriculture here.
You're dealing primarily with agriculture, but you're also dealing with people.
and you're trying to change the behavior of people to become more productive.
Did you feel at that time or do you feel since that you were sort of a social engineer?
I think I was pretty well aware of this from the early beginnings.
I may not have called it by that name, but I realized that change is like a snowball.
Once you get it going, it moves by gravity and it speeds up and it spreads in more than one direction.
That ball grows in all dimensions.
I think I was fairly aware of this from the beginning, probably because of my ideas of change that I'd seen as a
young boy on the farm and through the vocational agriculture, the Smith Hughes agriculture program I stayed in and studied in in high school.
I think that we were very fortunate.
I had an agriculture teacher in high school who was recently graduated from, as a matter of fact, his first year out of Iowa State University.
This is a vocational agriculture teacher, and he was an innovative sort of individual.
We conducted on farms, the first fertilizer test in the county, probably, where it was combined with the hybrid variety and fertilizer on farm.
Obviously, we could only have one test.
because it was done as part of the classwork.
We couldn't be goofing off too much.
So is this in the 1930s, the early 30s?
Yes.
In the late 20s.
Late 20s.
Probably in 28.
And so I was aware of some of these things.
That school had not yet established its future farmers chapter.
The year after I graduated in 32, that came into being through this same professor.
That same teacher spent his whole career there, and he died tragically.
He and the principal and two other biology teachers, when they went up to Minnesota, his name was Harry Schroeder, and went on a fishing expedition early in the spring,
And they were there and they'd been fishing apparently for the first day they'd come in at noon.
From what they found later, pretty good catch of fish and they must have been a little tired and they laid down on the bed and lit the fire because it was cold.
And there was a wasp nest in the chimney.
They all died from carbon monoxide.
But you, in other words, as early as the 1920s, you were aware of the impact of technology.
Yes.
On behavior.
I think I was sensitive to this at a pretty early age.
Yeah.
And it's grown on me.
And I think that through agriculture, you can reach people better.
The world's poor, the ones that need it most, because they're mostly farmers, subsistence farmers.
These in Sonora weren't necessarily subsistence.
No.
But there were subsistence farmers there.
In central Mexico, many of them were subsistence because this was land that had all been fragmented, but they changed the same way.
The thing in Sonora with the Hedo farmers, the Hedo was the land that was given where you don't own the land, you have the use of it.
And it was part of the new constitution following the revolution.
They were going to make sure by this article that never could this land be put back under these aristocratic ownerships like the or the church.
And their way of doing it was not to give them title to the land, the , but the use of the land as long as they farmed it and produced.
Of course, that last clause,
produced is a trip hammer because when you don't own something, you don't really put your heart and your life investment into it.
So that's been a booby trap.
But the intent was good.
The result was not so good.
And originally we had the field day for both together.
But then there was
attempt made later at the suggestion of some of the leaders of the Hedo, that maybe it'd be better if we had separate field days, so that these collective farmers who had less education generally, where you could spend a little more time and explain in a little more detail.
This was done, I think, for a short period of time, but it's been put back together again now.
Well, I think the education
of the hedal farmer has changed very greatly in the last 10 or 15 years, and that's probably why, and they should be kept together.
We were talking before about some of the problems that you had when you first got down, the first four years or five years of Mexico, and we talked about
arrangements, which would seem primitive to me.
What about the problems with the language?
You didn't speak Spanish.
I didn't speak a word.
I still remember the first word, first time I said buenos dias, and how embarrassed I was.
To our head accountant who just retired from, he was then the head accountant for Rockefeller Foundation.
He retired from
three years ago.
Tell me about Spanish.
You had to learn.
The ones who didn't, didn't stay long.
At that time, it was probably easier to learn Spanish than it is today for those who come to Simen, because at that time, there were very few, even of the young agronomists that spoke English.
Very few.
If they did, it was a few words.
You had no choice.
Either you went back and got out of the country or you learned.
And I never took any classes until I had worked probably two years.
Then I took from a very good teacher some personal private lessons.
And I should have taken more.
because my grammar, I mean, I have no problems, but if I want to speak about music and art, I need some fixing up.
Still today.
Because it's sort of an entirely different vocabulary.
The vocabulary would be easy to master, but once you get to be fluent,
When you've got a lot of other things that you want to do that seem more important, you don't continue to spend the time you should on a language.
And as a matter of fact, if I were to spend more time on the language now, I would like to spend more time on Portuguese.
Well, for Brazil.
And it's hopeless over in India and Pakistan with all those languages.
You better just not waste your time on trying to master those.
I would like to know Arabic, but it's too late in life for me to waste time on that.
I have another question, and this goes back to the Rockefeller Foundation and more of the early years.
Here we have the United States and Canada as two major wheat producing countries in the world, and we have already a strong foundation and even a tradition in agricultural experimentation, research, yet
The Rockefeller Foundation decides to establish a center, which became one of the greatest centers, a center for wheat research in an area which we generally call the Third World.
Why did the Rockefeller Foundation
you know, and which was also poor.
Why didn't the Rockefeller Foundation establish some sort of a research institution in some place in the United States?
Well, you see, the research institution as it evolved was a byproduct of this attempt to produce more, help Mexico produce more food.
And these other things spun off this.
This wasn't the original plan at all.
It was to try to see
They had been working in this international health programs for 25 years, from 1914 till 1940, whatever that is.
It's more than 25, isn't it?
26 years.
And among the things that it has spun off since we just mentioned China was the Peking Medical School.
But it had established some centers of excellence, if you want to call them.
They weren't the same excellence as today, but trying to get
people trained in medicine and public health elsewhere, and then sent out some good MDs, knowledgeable on vector-borne diseases, malaria, and especially on yellow fever, and medical entomologists knew the vectors, and sanitation engineers to fix up water and health conditions.
They had recognized, and so when Wallace called them about this possibility, or when he talked to Fosdick, they recognized that when infant mortality dropped, you got more mouths to feed, and since the food production was static, they were going from bad to worse.
And that's why they started this.
But once the ball started moving,
to have moved it back here would have been to have choked it because we were completely free.
We didn't have fixed ideas of what needed to be done.
I've told you about the photo period in sensitivity, the way we bred the weeds, we moved them, it was unorthodox.
Much later we found how flexible they were.
Our ideas of training young scientists was very different.
When the original program
was finished.
And when we were transferring the responsibility in 1960 to INYA, the National Institute of Agricultural Research, and we were working there, about six of us, still working hand in glove, FAO asked me to look at the programs on wheat from Morocco to India.
And that's where I saw that in